how might this work let's check out this
animated demo so in this demo we're
gonna start with the exact heap we had
in the question we're gonna insert three
so the way to think about this and maybe
you can just watch only this part and
this may give you a clue is we want to
first and foremost ensure that our tree
is still a heap when it's done so in
other words we need it to be a first of
all complete tree and second we need it
to be a min heap so in order to ensure
ensure completeness we could just throw
our item in here and at that point if we
look at this tree if we think about its
heap properties it has the min or it has
the completeness property but it is
missing the min heap property so we need
to fix that
so if you didn't quite figure it out
before maybe pause this video and figure
out what happens next
but in this case we can look at this we
could say what's wrong well 3 is not in
the right place right 5 is greater than
3 so 3 should be up higher and so what
we can do actually is say 3 you should
move up you should climb the tree to
your rightful place this is not for you
you're you're greater than this so we
swap my some above tree sometimes where
it's swim is used and swap up with 5 or
swap to 5 so 3 is better now if we think
about this this is a little tiny heap
this is recursive data structure but the
global structure is not a heap in
particular this right here starting at 5
is not heap and so we need to move this
3 up even higher so we move 3 up and at
this point we have guaranteed that this
whole thing over here is a heap right we
don't have to think about this left side
that's an important point and the reason
we don't need to think about it is that
5 which used to be there is less than 6
and so when 3 takes its place it is also
gonna be left less than this left tree
in other words we can climb up greedily
and end up in our correct place now at
this point 3 says this is my true place
good
so suppose we add another number let's
say 5 well in this case the end of the
heap is now here right it's not down
here somewhere it's gonna be here and 5
in this case is not in its right place
so I'll climb up until we find our
correct place ok so we go up and we find
ourself home for the first time in our
lives
finally
now let's take it about the deletion
operation and again if you didn't quite
figure it out before might be worth
pausing this video to think about how
you do this so again we're going to take
advantage of this idea that we want it
to always be complete that's against
straight it makes our lives easier so I
have to delete the minimum operation
item which is here and so if I wanted as
i'ma preserve completeness maybe the
most natural thing to do is to take the
last item and just stick it in the root
right so well delete it and then 6 finds
itself transported magically into the
top level
now of course 6 is very unlikely to
actually be a great new route in fact it
might be impossible it's always
impossible not certain anyway but at
this point 6 says you know I'm
definitely not cut out for this I'm I'm
like a lowly person on the totem pole I
should not be in charge of the whole
tree and so the person below says now
get out of here so 6 will now sync and
you'll wait you'll basically sync your
way down the hierarchy yielding to the
most qualified folks and your heat here
6 is still not quite in the right place
and so finally 6 is like whew that's
good if we delete again now 1 goes away
5 is now gonna get thrown to the wolves
in charge of the whole thing in this
case we actually have a tie so if we're
gonna sink we can actually just break
the tie totally arbitrarily it doesn't
matter to let's say I go left and then 5
will basically say I'm not gonna descend
further you know I found my right place
so I happened to get thrown into the
root of the whole tree and now when I
sink I'm gonna go down until I found
like I felt my found my place ok and so
that's that so in other words we could
think about the whole heap process as
the following right so given a heap how
do we implement the priority queue get
smallest we return the item in the root
node add we can think of it like a
company right so you can imagine that X
is a new employee you'd place the new
employee in the last position and you'll
throw at them as high as possible so you
stick them down in the low level you
know factory floor job and then you see
how high they can go and remove smallest
you basically assassinate the president
of the company promote the rightmost
person in the company
to president whoever that person is so
you go to the bottom of the org chart
and you're just like okay the last
department on the list is let's say just
arbitrarily gardening
okay so among among all the landscaping
folks who's the lowest person on the
totem pole they're okay you know it's
the guy that like bites the twigs
okay well we'll take the twig biting guy
put him in charge of the company and
then we'll just demote that person
repeatedly until you find yourself in
the appropriate location and when you do
the demotion a really important thing is
you have to basically vice-presidents
you pick the stronger of the two
vice-presidents and so there's a
remaining question which is how can we
do this all all this in java and well
we'll talk about that a little bit in in
these next little bits but before we do
that we have to think carefully about
how trees could be represented in Java